# Enrichment analyses of disease communities and community clusters with biological annotations 

This folder contains the codes to perform enrichment analyses using biological annotations from the Gene Ontology (GO Biological Processes and GO Cellular Components) and Reactome pathways. The enrichment analyses can be performed at the level of communities (the genes belonging to each disease community are used as input of the enrichment analysis) or at the level of clusters (clusters are composed of different disease communities; for each cluster, the union of the genes belonging to the communities composing the cluster are used as input). It is possible to extend the enrichment analyses to consider other biological annotation databases.

The enrichment analysis are performed using g:Profiler, and the enrichment results are filtered using orsum.

## Folders and files

The folder ```EnrichBioAnnot_Clusters``` contains the codes to perform the enrichment analysis at the level of clusters. It contains the following scripts:

* ```enrichment_clusters.py```: Python script containing functions to perform enrichment analysis at the level of clusters. 
* ```orsum_enrichment_clusters.py```: Python script containing functions to filter the enrichment results using orsum.

The folder ```EnrichBioAnnot_Communities``` contains the codes to perform the enrichment analysis at the level of communities. It contains the following scripts:

* ```enrichment_communities.py```: Python script containing functions to perform enrichment analysis of individual communities
* ```orsum_enrichment_communities.py```: Python script containing functions to filter the enrichment results of communities using orsum.

## Usage

    python enrichment_clusters.py -p /path/where/communities/folders/are/stored

    python enrichment_communities.py -p /path/where/communities/folders/are/stored

After having modified the script with your version of orsum (line 53), run:

    python orsum_enrichment_clusters.py

    python orsum_enrichment_communities.py


## Output

For both enrichments analyses, at the level of clusters or communities, the enrichment results will be generated in the folders ```EnrichBioAnnot_Clusters/output_tables``` and ```EnrichBioAnnot_Communities/output_tables```. The files generated by orsum and the results of orsum enrichment filtering, including the corresponding heatmaps, are generated in the ```EnrichBioAnnot_Clusters/output_orsum``` and ```EnrichBioAnnot_Communities/output_orsum``` folders. 

## References

* Ashburner, M. et al. Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. en. Nature Genet-
ics 25. Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, 25–29. ISSN: 1546-1718. doi:10.
1038/75556 (May 2000).

* The Gene Ontology Consortium et al. The Gene Ontology knowledgebase in 2023. Ge-
netics 224, iyad031. ISSN: 1943-2631. doi:10.1093/genetics/iyad031 (May 2023).

* Raudvere, U. et al. g:Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and con-
versions of gene lists (2019 update). en. Nucleic Acids Research 47, W191–W198. ISSN:
0305-1048, 1362-4962. doi:10.1093/nar/gkz369 (July 2019).

* Ozisik, O., Térézol, M. & Baudot, A. orsum: a Python package for filtering and comparing
enrichment analyses using a simple principle. en. BMC Bioinformatics 23, 293. ISSN:
1471-2105. doi:10.1186/s12859-022-04828-2 (Dec. 2022).
