# Clustering of gene communities based on the Jaccard index

This folder contains the Python codes allowing us to perform a clustering of gene communities based on their similarity (i.e., the node overlaps) using the Jaccard index.

The Jaccard index is the ratio of the number of genes common (i.e., overlapping) between two communities over the union of the community genes.

## Files

* ```cluster_communities.py```: Python script containing functions to compute pairwise Jaccard indices between communities and perform the clustering of communities.

* ```analyse_genes_in_clusters.py```: Python script containing functions to analyse the genes inside clusters of communities.

## Usage

    python cluster_communities.py -p /path/where/communities/folders/are/stored

    python analyse_genes_in_clusters.py -p /path/where/communities/folders/are/stored

## Output

* ```output_figures```: a folder containing the generated figures, which are a clustermap of disease-associated communities based on the Jaccard index, as well as the corresponding dendrogram of diseases, generated by the ```cluster_communities.py``` script.

* ```output_tables```: a folder containing files describing the genes represented in each cluster of communities, generated by the script ```analyse_genes_in_clusters.py```. This script also generates a file ```cluster_100.tsv``` which recapitulates the diseases belonging to each cluster.

The script ```cluster_communities.py``` also generates a file ```cluster_output_100_0.7.tsv``` which recapitulates which communities are gathered in each cluster. This file is also copied in the ```_00_data``` folder for it to be used for downstream analysis. 
